Kip 15 (#24)
kaspanet/kips: kip-0015.md

```
KIP: 15
Layer: Consensus (hard fork)
Title: Canonical Transaction Ordering and SelectedParent Accepted Transactions Commitment
Type: Consensus change (block format)
Author: Mike Zak <feanorr@gmail.com>

> Comments-URI: # TODO https://research.kas.pa/t/crescendo-hardfork-discussion-thread/279

Reviewer: Remove TODO, I think you can use the same URI

> created: 2025-02-01

Reviewer: Fix dates?

updated: 2025-02-01
Status: Draft
```

# Motivation
L2 networks on top of Kaspa rely on Kaspa for both consensus and data availability.  
In other words, the Kaspa L1 provides the list of accepted transactions and their order, 
while L2 interprets the transaction payloads and executes corresponding logic.
In such cases the ordering of transaction acceptance in L1 has to be the ordering of transaction execution on L2.  
As such, the acceptance and ordering of transactions on L1 is of utmost importance to L2 applications. 

> In addition, a Kaspa node prunes the transaction and header data after c. 52 hours (12 hours post-Crescendo ) 

Reviewer: 12 -> 30 
(finality is 12, pruning is planned to be 30)

A naive design could go along the following lines:
```
1. Download the Selected Parent Chain block headers from tip up to the inception of L2
2. For each block in the Selected Parent Chain bottom-to-top:
   1. Download the list of accepted transactions
   2. Validate it against the block's AcceptedIDMerkleRoot
```

The above design has two faults:
1. There is much data in the block headers which is redundant for this process 
2. Currently, AcceptedIDMerkleRoot does not commit to transaction ordering. (See more on this in the following section)

## AcceptedIDMerkleRoot sorting
Currently, after collecting all transactions accepted by a block, a Kaspa node sorts these transactions according
to their hash before calculating AcceptedIDMerkleRoot.  

This was done as an optimization, to facilitate future proofs of exclusion:  
A proof of exclusion in a non-sorted merkle tree requires the revelation of all the tree's nodes (`O(n)`), while 
a proof of exclusion in a sorted merkle tree only requires the revelation of a single branch within the 
tree (`O(log n)`), showing two adjacent nodes, one lesser and one greater than the node we wish to prove its exclusion.

> As far as we know, there is currently no application on top of Kaspa using the above feature.

Reviewer: another possible argument: a proof of exclusion from the mergeset of a specific chain block seems unuseful. To prove exclusion from a period such as a day you would need a linearly long proof for proving exclusion from each chain block.

Author: Will add the argument

```
KIP: 15
Layer: Consensus (hard fork)
Title: Canonical Transaction Ordering and SelectedParent Accepted Transactions Commitment
Type: Consensus change (block format)
Author: Mike Zak <feanorr@gmail.com>

> Co-Author: Ro Ma @reshmem 

Reviewer 2: A little bit of nitpicking, but until now we've sticked to only one `Author` field, with multiple names separated by commas. Generally speaking, we use the [BIP format](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0002.mediawiki) as a non-strict guideline

Author: Yes, sure. Will fix. Thanks !

> Comments-URI: https://research.kas.pa/t/crescendo-hardfork-discussion-thread/279

Reviewer 2: Please create a dedicated thread and link it here. Alternatively, delete this row and re-add it after the KIP is merged

Author: Done

> Acknowledgements: Thanks to Michael Sutton @michaelsutton for the discussions leading to this KIP.  

Reviewer 2: I think I would move it to the bottom. It shouldn't be part of the header

Author: Done, moved it to the bottom

```
KIP: 15
Layer: Consensus (hard fork)
Title: Canonical Transaction Ordering and SelectedParent Accepted Transactions Commitment
Type: Consensus change (block format)
Author: Mike Zak <feanorr@gmail.com>
Co-Author: Ro Ma @reshmem 

> Comments-URI: # https://research.kas.pa/t/crescendo-hardfork-discussion-thread/279

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comments-URI: https://research.kas.pa/t/crescendo-hardfork-discussion-thread/279
```

Acknowledgements: Thanks to Michael Sutton @michaelsutton for the discussions leading to this KIP.  
created: 2025-02-01
updated: 2025-02-20

> Status: In review 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status: proposed 
```

A naive design could go along the following lines:
```
1. Download the Selected Parent Chain block headers from tip up to the inception of L2
2. For each block in the Selected Parent Chain bottom-to-top:
   1. Download the list of accepted transactions
   2. Validate it against the block's AcceptedIDMerkleRoot
```

The above design has two faults:
1. There is much data in the block headers which is redundant for this process 
2. Currently, AcceptedIDMerkleRoot does not commit to transaction ordering. (See more on this in the following section)

## AcceptedIDMerkleRoot sorting
Currently, after collecting all transactions accepted by a block, a Kaspa node sorts these transactions according
to their hash before calculating AcceptedIDMerkleRoot.  

This was done as an optimization, to facilitate future proofs of exclusion:  
A proof of exclusion in a non-sorted merkle tree requires the revelation of all the tree's nodes (`O(n)`), while 
a proof of exclusion in a sorted merkle tree only requires the revelation of a single branch within the 
tree (`O(log n)`), showing two adjacent nodes, one lesser and one greater than the node we wish to prove its exclusion.

> As far as we know, there is currently no application on top of Kaspa using the above feature.
> We would also wish to argue that above optimization is of lesser importance than the ability to prove transaction
> acceptance order. 
> 
> Another possible argument: a proof of exclusion from the `mergeset` of a specific chain block seems unuseful. 
> To prove exclusion from a period such as a day you would need a linearly long proof for proving exclusion from each 
> chain block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As far as we know, there is currently no application on top of Kaspa using the above feature. Additionally, a proof of exclusion from the `mergeset` of a specific chain block seems unuseful, while for proving exclusion from a period such as a day you would need a linearly long proof for showing exclusion from each and every chain block.
We would also wish to argue that the above optimization is of lesser importance than the ability to prove transaction acceptance order. 
```
